RDBMS:

Uses structured tables with fixed schemas.

RDBMS follows ACID rules for strict data consistency.

RDBMS uses sql for query, joins, aggregation and etc.

No sql:

Uses flexible , non-tabular formats like documents or key-value pairs.

NoSQL dbs are optimized to scale horizontally by adding more servers to a cluster.

No sql dbs are not optimized for transaction.

No sql uses varied query apis depending on the data model.\


Mongodb uses javascript apis.


JSON format:

Java Script Object Notation.

Lightweight text based data format used to store and transmit data.
Collection key value pairs.

{
"id":235533,
"name":"Ravichandran",
"designation":"DBA"

}

Data types supported:

String, Number , Boolean (true or false), Null, Array & Object(includes Date )

employee={
"id":235533,
"name":"Ravichandran",
"designation":"DBA",
"address":{
	"location":"Hebbal",	
	"city":"Bangalore"	
}
}

emp.id-----235533
emp.name----"Ravichandran"
emp.address.city---"Bangalore"

NoSQL db usecases:

Social media data
Track user activity
Logging Data
Sensor Data




Types of NoSQL dbs:

1. key-value pair based-----Data is stored in key value pairs

Examples: Redis, AWS Dynamo

2. document oriented:
Each row is stored as a document.
The document is stored in json or xml format

Examples: Mongodb, Couch DB, AWS Single DB


3. Column Oriented database

All the values of a single column are stored together.

Examples: Cassandra, HBase

4. Graph based database:

Data is represented in the form of vertices of a graph.
The relationship between the data is represented through the edges.

Examples: Neo 4J, AWS Neptune

Mongodb:

Document Oriented NoSQL db which stores data in BSON(Binary Json) format.
BSON is a binary encoded serialization format.

It extends json to provide higher performance and richer data types like objectId, Date and binary data.

Mongod process:

Mongod is the core background daemon process for mongodb, responsible for managing data access, client connections and background operations like indexing and data manipulation.

mongosh is the client shell to interact with the mongod process.

default databases in mongodb:

admin----contains security credentials and contains metadata of administrative operations.
Stores the user accounts, system roles and permissions for the entire database cluster.
local----stores metadata and internal data specific to the individual node in a replica set.
config---used internally when setting up sharded cluster.

In mongodb, physically a database or a collection need not be available to insert data.

When the first row is inserted, the table is automatically created.

When the first row in the first table is inserted, the db is automatically created.

Mongodb follows camelCase naming convention.

The first word will start with lowercase and subsequent words start with upper case.

deptId
insertOne
updateOne


_id is a special field used to uniquely identify every document in a collection.


rdbms		mongodb

database	database
table		collection
row		document
column		field

By default, mongodb uses an ObjectId as the value for _id field.

An objectId is a 12 byte identifier designed to be unique.

_id is automatically indexed.

Mongodb automatically creates a unique index on _id.

Mongodb does not allow you to update the _id field of an existing document.

12 bytes structure
4 bytes-------creation time (seconds)
5 bytes-------random value-----------machine/process context
3 bytes-------counter----------------makes the ids unique within the same second

updating:

$set------setting /adding value of a field
$rename---renaming a field
$unset---removes a field.
$inc-----increase/decrease numeric value
$push----add value to an array field

$pull----remove a value from an array field


Upsert-------update or insert

If a matching document exists, it is updated.
If no matching document exists, a new document is inserted.

Mongodb Aggregation:

Aggregation is used to process documents and produce calculated results similar to SQL's group by, sum, avg and etc.
The aggregation pipeline uses multi stage process where documents pass through a series of transformations.

aggregation pipeline stage operators:

$match-----filters documents
$group-----groups documents by a specific key
$project---projecting specific fields
$sort------ordering
$unwind----deconstructs an array field.


/etc/mongod.conf:

This is the central configuration file of mongodb.
It is used to manage the behavior, security , storage and network settings of mongod process.

The /etc/mongod.conf file is in yaml format.

yaml----yet another markup language

#user profile info
name:	Arvind
age:	30
address:
	location: Hebbal
	city	: Bangalore




address.location----Hebbal
address.city--------Bangalore


dbPath-----location where data files for mongodb are stored.


By default mongod uses port 27017.

Running two instances of mongodb in a single machine.

1. stop the default instance

sudo systemctl stop mongod

2. create the data directories of the two instances.

student@ubuntu:~/Desktop$ sudo mkdir /var/lib/data1
   
student@ubuntu:~/Desktop$ sudo mkdir /var/lib/data2

3. start the first instance in the default port(27017).

open a new terminal tab and run the following command.

sudo mongod --dbpath /var/lib/data1










